# Femto 0.2


This is exciting! ``femto`` is now a capable-enough top-line repl. Capable
enough that I'm no longer using the cooked-mode REPL which I started with,
and certainly not lua(jit) -i.


The 0.1 release needs some polishing, most of the notes for that are in-line.


It's time to start planning out 0.2.


## Big-picture design

Right now, ``femto`` shares a namespace with the 'program'. Actually, it is the
program.  I'm reminded of this every time I accidentally declare an ``a`` and
blow my terminal object to pieces.


There's a super-light fix, which is to just wrap _G as a metatable.  I'd need
to think about how that interacts with the colorizer; but in any case it
doesn't get us where we need to go.


### Pylon 0.2

``pylon`` is effectively 0.1. In the process of adding semver so that this can
be made blessed and official.


0.2 is going to enhance our runtime so that it can allocate and free a
flexible number of lua states.  It won't have any thread management or process
forking, at least not in 0.2, and we'll most likely stick with ``libuv`` for
threads and handle forks and processes on an even higher level.  ``pylon`` is
explicitly a process-level abstraction.


The C to manage these states will expose through the internal FFI, giving us
the tooling to establish multiple Lua environments from within ``pylon``.
I'm going to reach out to Tim Caswell on this, because the first-step goal is
to run ``femto`` against other ``luv`` applications in the classic runtime
attachment style, and I think they're going to like this and have some
insight into how to do it.


## Femto 0.2: runtime architecture

According to the roadmap, ``femto`` will grow for two or three point releases,
then slim down.  By 1.0, it will handle tty reads and writes; end of story.


In the meantime, we're going to have a "fat femto". It will be a nursery for
techniques and libraries which will end up in ``bridge`` and ``codex`` and ``ed``
as time goes by.


``femto`` 1.0 will be around 1000 lines of Lua, with a full graphical ``anterm``
protocol, about twice that.  I expect it will look a fair amount like it does
now, just with all the modules living elsewhere.


So. 0.2. We'll steadily beef up modeselecktor into a respectable editor, not
much to say about that.


I'll be working out good and better strategies for SQLite persistence of
objects, ending up with a sort of T-shaped structure: ``pylon`` will juggle two
or three SQLite states, one for the i/o loop, one for the attached runtime,
and possibly a third to handle disk persistence.


State is shared between Luas, each of which is on its own thread, by a shared
in-memory SQLite database. Each will have its own conn, and its own trigger
collection, and between them, that database will manage flow between the
otherwise non-blocking systems.


### LuaL_states: pylon or femto?

It's possible to just generate new LuaL_states from the ``luv`` threadpool.
Let's go the distance and manage them from within Pylon.  Otherwise we've
preselected a privileged state and that kinda decision leads to regret.


I don't think we save any ass or neck pain with this choice, either.  Might
need some flick of the wrist to keep the ``luv`` and ``pylon`` ideas of what's
happening consistent.


``femto`` is 0.2 when user commands are inserted into the shared-memory
database, triggering an update in the attached loop, where the return value
is then inserted to that database, triggering an update on the ``femto`` side.
During idles, these changes get transacted to store.


Letting the database keep blocking on the femto side is probably okay for 0.2.
When building ``n`` interacting systems, set ``n=2`` at first.


But the user OODA loop is sacred, and ``bridge`` systems give it the highest
priority the platform easily allows.


## Game Plan

My nomenclature is aspirational as much as it is informative. ``pylon`` makes a
binary called ``br``, and I'll fork it and have that fork make ``bur`` or
something, while I make a test repo that purely works out the basic character
of running a couple processes against each other.


I'm hoping to get some reasonable advice from Tim Caswell, whom I will put on
the contact list for femto 0.1. I want luv/lit/luvit programs to be able to
pull in one module  and then be able to connect to the ``bridge`` repl from
there.


I think the boot sequence is: if the -i flag isn't present, just run the
program, if it is, fire up the repl first, which launches a second state
that holds a conn to ``~/.bridge`` and another to an in-memory DB, once the
luser has a prompt, set up the programme, print any output to a buffer, then
run back any session from the DB.


This is all a little mind-bending but having an ACID store between threads is
literally what STM is and I think once I figure out some good, if not totally
ordered, semantics for ORM in Lua, we'll be in pretty nice shape.


Clu is supposed to be "What if Clojure except persistent rather than immutable"
and having the snapshot living in in-memory and store DBs while the state
itself lives in a fast mutable object is a good premise.


It's not exceptionally expensive to keep undo buffers and the like, and I tend
to want the property that a pointer always shows the latest state, rather than
value-side referential transparency.


Quipu are intended to have this property also. I recognize that this makes
OT editing of them inappropriate and that's fine, we solve one problem at a
time and using a fast, owned quipu doesn't preclude more intricate AST forms
later.


What I want is a form of undo which looks for changes by recency within a
defined form. Usually a function, sometimes a conditional.


### Build model objects

To really get places in this refactoring, I intend to build small collections
of objects which simply exhibit the behavior I'm looking for.  These will be
useful in PMPLVM and will spare a lot of grief compared to bolting new
patterns onto existing systems.


This is of course the huge advantage of a proper prototype object system.
We don't try and make an ontology or figure out what a class is or why we
would need one. We just hook a few tables together with our surrounding C and
library code and get them doing what we want.


I do need to figure out a couple really-basic things.  Like how to register
a trigger with SQLite from Lua.
